http://www.brentwoodtc.org/glossary.htm
Glossary of trampolining terms

adolf/adolph	a front somersault with 3½ twists
airplane	½ twist to front drop with initial take-off being of backward rotation
arabian	½ twist into front somersault with initial take-off being of backward rotation
arm set	the action of ensuring arms are in a static vertical position by the time a jump leaves the trampoline - now the preferred method for starting all routines and moves when performed in isolation
arm swing	the action of moving arms through a vertical position as a jump leaves the trampoline but then continuing in a backward direction of rotation - often used in back somersaults although not now a preferred method
baby fliffus	a move starting on the back, early ½ twist into 1¼ back somersault. Different to ball out - barani.
back (somersault)	a somersault with backward rotation
back in – full out	a double back somersault with a full twist performed during the 2nd somersault
back drop	a move starting on feet and rotating backwards ¼ of a somersault and landing on back
back pullover	a move starting on the back, ¾ back somersault to feet (also variations to stomach, back or seat)
ball out	a move starting on the back, 1¼ front somersault landing on feet
ball out - adolf	a move starting on the back, 1¼ front somersault with 3½ twist.
ball out - barani	a move starting on the back, 1¼ front somersault with a late ½ twist. Different to baby fliffus.
ball out - half out	a move starting on the back, 2¼ front somersault with a ½ twist in the 2nd somersault.
ball out - randy	a move starting on the back, 1¼ front somersault with 2½ twist.
ball out - rudy	a move starting on the back, 1¼ front somersault with 1½ twist.
barani - ball out	misleading (though more popular) name for ball out - barani, misleading because it puts emphasis on the barani rather that the ball-out element which is required to be initiated first.
barani in - back out	a double front somersault, with ½ twist in the 1st somersault, and no twist in the 2nd somersault; also known as "half in - back out"
barani out	a double front somersault with a ½ twist in the 2nd somersault. more usually known as "half out".
barani	a forward somersault with a ½-twist   named after Italian circus acrobat and tumbler Alfonso Barani who "invented" the front salto with ½ twist around 1881.
barrel roll	a move starting on the stomach, with one full twist, landing again on the stomach; also known as a "log roll".
bed	the part of the trampoline on which performers bounce
bluch	a move starting on the stomach, a complete side somersault, landing again on the stomach, more usually called "turntable".  Named after Jim Blutch (pronounced blootsh) who "invented" the move during the 1940's and the skill carried his name until about 1955.
bounce-roll	a move starting on the back, with a front somersault, landing again on the back; less commonly known as a "porpoise" or "dolphin".
cast	 movement towards either long side of the trampoline frame during a move.
cat twist	a move starting on the back, with one full twist, landing again on the back.
cody	a move starting on the stomach, 1¼ back somersault.  Named after Joe Kotys of Akron Ohio, one of the few persons to compete internationally in both trampoline and gymnastics.
compulsory	 pre-designed routine that contain specific skills / moves required of the trampolinist.  Also known as "set".
corkscrew	a move starting on the back, ½ front somersault with 1½ twists to back.
coverall pads	 filled pads which completely cover the frame and springs for safety.
cradle	a move starting on the back, ½ front somersault with ½ twist to back.
crash dive	¾ front somersault (straight) - this expression is now considered incorrect since it has a negative connotation in the use of the word 'crash'.
crash mat	a foam filled mat that a coach might use to reduce the rebound of a trampolinist when developing a new move.  It is not a substitute for proper coaching of technique.  Better name is "push-in mat", also often known as "throw-in mat" - particularly given the negative connotation of 'crash' already referred to above.
degree of difficulty [dd]	a rating that measures the difficulty of specific moves and is factored into the total score after judges have scored the execution of the moves; also known as tariff.
de-synchronisation	scoring how much the pair of synchro-trampolinists are out of 'tempo' with each other, judged by the difference in height of the landing.
dolphin	a move starting on the back, with a front somersault, landing again on the back; more commonly known as a "bounce-roll", and less commonly as a "porpoise".
dorso-ventricle axis	an axis passing through the navel, around which the side somersault and turntable are done.  No award for tariff is made for rotation around it.
double back	a double back somersault without twist.
double bounce-roll	a move starting on the back, with a double front somersault, landing again on the back.
double full	a back somersault with 2 complete twists.  Not to be confused with the term "full - full" or more normally "full in - full out".
double mini (tramp) [dmt]	an elongated version of a "mini" trampoline that is open at either end - useful for circus tricks and games.  The 'artiste' runs and mounts, performs a trick or two whilst rebounding across the apparatus, landing on a foam filled pad at the other end.  Now gaining a little more support but still very niche.
element	a component part of a skill that has a recognised way of performance.
end deck	a large, thick mat that sits on a frame at each end of the trampoline to cushion the impact if anyone falls from the apparatus.  Less frequently known as "safety platform".
execution	1. the performance of a routine. 
2. the form, style and technique used to complete the skills included in a routine
f.i.g. or FIG	federation internationale gymnastique, the organizing body for international gymnastics competitions including the Olympics.  FIG makes the rules, trains and certifies judges, and determines how competitions are run.
fliffis	any double somersault with a twist
forward turnover	¾ front somersault, starting from feet.  A specific variant in the straight position is termed a "crash dive".
frame	major metal parts of the trampoline.
front drop	a move starting on feet and rotating forwards ¼ of a somersault and landing on front
front [somersault]	a somersault with forward rotation.
full	full twisting back somersault
full in - back out	a double back somersault with a full twist performed during the 1st somersault.
full in - double full out	a double back somersault, with 1 twist in the 1st somersault, and 2 twists in the 2nd somersault; also known as a "miller".
full in - full out	a double back somersault, with 1 twist in the 1st somersault, and 1 twist in the 2nd somersault.
full in - half out	a double front somersault, with 1 twist in the 1st somersault, and ½ twist in the 2nd somersault.
full in - rudi out	a double front somersault, with 1 twist in the 1st somersault, and 1½ twist in the 2nd somersault.
full out	a double back somersault with a full twist performed during the 2nd somersault. also known as "back in - full out".
full twist jump	a move whereby a trampolinist rotates 360° around the body's longitudinal axis, finishes facing the same end of the trampoline.
gain	travel arising from excessive displacement of the hips in initiation of somersault movements; e.g. travelling forwards in a back somersault. Carries same penalties from execution judge as "travel".
gyroscopic precession	complex mechanical phenomenon where twist rotation is obtained by 'borrowing' somersault rotation, in straight twisting moves. Translates into 'tilt - twist' in twisting multiple somersaults and easily visible viewed from the short end of the trampoline.
half in - half out	a double back somersault with a ½ twist in each somersault.
half in - rudi out	a double back somersault, with ½ twist in the 1st somersault, and 1½ twist in the 2nd somersault.
half in (- back out)	a double front somersault, with ½ twist in the 1st somersault, and no twist in the 2nd somersault; also known as "barani in - back out".
half out	a double front somersault with a ½ twist in the 2nd somersault. sometimes known as "barani out". see illustration in side panel.
half turntable	a move starting on the stomach, 180° of side somersault, landing again on the stomach.
half twist jump	a move whereby a trampolinist rotates 180° around the body's longitudinal axis, finishes facing the opposite end of the trampoline.
jonah	early ½ twist into back somersault with initial take-off being consistent with forward rotation
jump to back landing	the new 'correct' way of talking about back drops
jump to front landing	the new 'correct' way of talking about front drops
jump to seat landing	the new 'correct' way of talking about seat drops
kaboom	somersault from front (or back) landing, where a double contact is made. the legs hit the trampoline bed momentarily after the body, reversing the rotation generated from the body.
kick out	extension of the legs to straight body position after the shape phase of a somersault is completed.  Line out is a preferred term since kick-out implies a degree of vigour and almost violent action that might lack aesthetic qualilties.
killer	a double back somersault with 4 complete twists. also known as a miller plus, and a poliarush (Dimitri Poliarush - BLR - winner, 1996 World Championships).
kip	assistance given by a coach whilst on the bed; can be used to increase, neutralise or lower the trampolinist's bouncing height.
lateral axis	axis roughly defined as through the hips, around which front and back somersaults are done.
layout	a straight (or slightly arched) position of the body.
lazy back	¾ back somersault.  This expression is now considered to be inappropriate since it has a connotation of laziness but, in fact, requires a performer to be fully aware of what they are doing and not half asleep!
line out	good technique where trampolinist neatly places arms beside extended body on completion of shape phase, or whilst twisting.
log roll	a move starting on the stomach, with one full twist, landing again on the stomach; also known as a "barrel roll".
longitudinal axis	axis from head through the body, around which twisting is done.
lost move [syndrome]	psychological condition where the performer loses the awareness and technique of a particular move.
miller plus	a double back somersault with 4 complete twists.  Also known as a killer (sic), and a poliarush (Dimitri Poliarush -BLR - winner, 1996 world championships).
miller	a triple-twisting double back somersault, originally performed as "2½ in - ½ out", nowadays usually performed as "full in - double full out", with 1 twist in the 1st somersault, and 2 twists in the 2nd somersault; named after Wayne Miller (USA) - winner, 1966 & 1970  world championships.
overhead rig	overhead apparatus with a belt, ropes, pulleys and fittings allowing the coach to provide remote support for a move whilst the performer is learning.
pike	a position where the body is bent forward at the hips to 90° or more while the legs are kept straight, with the thighs close to the upper body.
piked jump	move showing the "piked" shape alone, i.e.. no rotation or twist.
planterflexion	extension of ankle joint - technical name for 'point your toes'.
poliarush	a double back somersault with 4 complete twists.   Named after Dimitri Poliarush (blr) - winner, 1996  world championships.
porpoise	a move starting on the back, with a front somersault, landing again on the back; more commonly known as a "bounce-roll", and less commonly as a "dolphin".
puck	semi-tucked shape allowable in competition for multi-twisting multiple somersaults.  For competition, the rules require an angle between the body and thighs, and the thighs and lower legs, of   90° - 120°.
push-in mat	a foam filled mat that a coach might use to reduce the rebound of a trampolinist when developing a new move.  It is not a substitute for proper coaching of technique. Also known as "throw-in mat", and "crash mat".
quadriffis	any quadruple somersault combined with a component of twist.
radius of gyration	mathematical term for how 'spread apart' the body is when a somersault or twist is done around an axis.
randolph	a front somersault with 2½ twists; also known as a "randy".
randy	a front somersault with 2½ twists; also known as a "randolph".
rig	 overhead apparatus with a belt, ropes, pulleys and fittings allowing the coach to provide remote support for a move whilst the performer is learning.
rob-roy	a move starting on the back, ½ front somersault with 2 ½ twists to back.
rocket	a kipped bounce whilst the kippee's hands are being held by the kipper.
roller	a move starting on the seat, full twist to seat drop
routine	a combination of movements or manoeuvres displaying a specific range of skills.
rudi out	a double front somersault with 1½ twists in the 2nd somersault".
rudolph	a front somersault with 1½ twists, also known as a rudy.  Named after Dave Rudolph who executed the 1½ twisting front somersault on a trampoline in the late 1920's in vaudeville. Randolph and adolph were "invented" names for the kindred skills they represent.
rudy	a "rudolph"
safety platform	a large, thick mat that sits on a frame at each end of the trampoline to cushion the impact if anyone falls from the apparatus. Also known as "end deck"
salto	a somersault, i.e. rotation around the axis of the hips.
seat drop	a move starting on feet and rotating backwards a minimal amount (much less than ¼ of a somersault) and landing on seat
set	a pre-designed routine that contain specific skills / moves required of the trampolinist.  Also known as "compulsory".
side somersault	a 360° rotation around an axis passing through the navel (dorso-ventral axis).
skill	a specific move that has a recognised way of performance and technical value.
somersault	 an acrobatic movement where the body makes a complete revolution, heels over head; also known as 'salto'.
straddle	a position where the legs are split at least shoulder width apart and the legs are kept straight whilst the upper body is aligned forward at the hips at an angle greater than 45°.
straddled jump	move showing the "straddle" shape alone, i.e. no rotation or twist.
straight	a position where the body is extended in a straight line, technically defined as the upper body and the legs being positioned at an angle of more than 135°.
spotter(s)	People positioned at points around a trampoline in order to ensure additional safety for performers who might otherwise fall off without their intervention.
swivel hips	a move starting on the seat, a ½ twist in upright position, landing again on seat.
synchronised [trampolining]	two people jumping on separate trampolines in time with each other.  They must perform identical moves or skills simultaneously.
tag	trampoline game. every player has to repeat all skills of those that went before in the correct order and append an additional skill at the end; also known as "add-on". (variants add-before, add-between)
tariff	a rating that measures the difficulty of specific moves and is factored into the total score after judges have scored the execution of the moves; also known as 'degree of difficulty [dd]'.
three - quarter turnover	¾ front somersault, starting from feet.  Also known as 'forward turnover'. a specific variant in the straight position is termed a "crash dive.
throw-in mat	a foam filled mat that a coach might use to reduce the rebound of a trampolinist when developing a new move. it is not a substitute for proper coaching of technique. Better name is "push-in mat", often known as "crash mat".
tilt-twist	complex mechanical phenomenon whereby aerial twist rotation, obtained by 'borrowing' somersault rotation in straight twisting somersaults, translates into an amount of "tilt".  Easily visible viewed from the short end of the trampoline. Caused by "gyroscopic precession".
travel	1. movement away from the centre of the bed, with appropriate form deduction if excessive (outside the box).  
2. movement along the bed in the same direction as the shoulders in somersault rotation, i.e. travelling backwards in a back somersault.
triffis [or triff]	any triple somersault combined with a component of twist.
tuck	a position where the knees are bent and drawn into the chest, with the upper body folded at the waist at angle of greater than 45° from the upper legs.
tucked jump	move showing the "tuck" shape alone, i.e.. no rotation or twist.
turntable	a move starting on the stomach, a complete side somersault, landing again on the stomach. (see Bluch).
twist	rotation around the body's longitudinal axis, roughly defined by the spine.
twist jump	move showing the "twist" action alone, i.e. no somersault rotation.
The Acrobatic Sports website contains a useful glossary of more advanced moves including video footage of world class performance of many of them.

      
Send mail to Webmaster with questions or comments about this web site.
Copyright © 2009-2012 Brentwood Trampoline ®              Data Protection Act Registered Z107271X
 
ShareThis Copy and Paste - See more at: http://www.brentwoodtc.org/glossary.htm#sthash.QoKSh3BZ.dpuf